---
title: 'Don’t ignore the basics: JS, CSS, HTML'
stub:
  Why the building blocks of the web remain the core drivers of success in the
  modern web.
published: 2018-01-30T02:30:53.235Z
tags:
  - web development
  - javascript
---

The modern web is a daunting place for the novice. Gone are the days when good
ole’ HTML, CSS and PHP would get you by. This is the era of progressive web
applications, there’s a whole industry spawned called frontend engineering,
security has become a thing, and browsers have become infinitely more capable
and powerful — and that aint even the half of it. There’s a lot more to learn
that there ever has been, and there are hundreds and thousands of truly
excellent places to learn from. But a lot — and I really mean a lot — is a
distraction.

We somehow forget, I believe, that at the heart of the web are three core
building blocks, CSS, HTML and Javascript. Given this it’s honestly astounding
how few web developers properly understand the vanilla instances of each
language. People might know how to use say, React.js, but fail to properly
understand async concepts of Javascript, promises or the principles of the DOM.
Or they might copy a whole chunk of CSS but be unable to edit or manipulate it
without getting confused or lost.

For anyone that hasn’t or needs a refresher please spend some time poring over
the excellent, comprehensive documentation that exists over at
[Mozilla](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web).

Each of these sub-parts are deep rabbit-holes of their own mastery and to be
truly on top of them takes time, but none are strictly too difficult to start
fiddling around with. A moderate level of HTML/CSS/JS underwritten by a good
foundational programming knowledge is enough to make almost any complex website.
Don’t forget the fundamentals, and don’t retreat to the flashy frameworks too
quickly, it’ll do you a disservice in the end.

This article was originally published on
[medium](https://medium.com/p/563fdcd6fe2e).
