---
title: How I became a web developer
stub:
  My own journey wading into the world of web dev. It’s not as easy as it looks,
  it takes time, and it’s not for everyone.
published: 2017-06-30T02:30:53.235Z
tags:
  - web development
  - javascript
  - personal
---

![source: https://twitter.com/davechenell/status/557328423602098178](https://pbs.twimg.com/media/B7wHP3zIAAA0wi-?format=png&name=900x900)

There’s an old meme that surfaced on my facebook feed (above) not so long ago
that basically sums up how (many) people perceive web development. It’s funny in
that it probably should be (and who knows — maybe someday will) just that easy.

Part of this cognitive dissonance stems, I think, from the programs we’re used
to and have grown up on. We’ve all used a program like Microsoft Word, or Google
Docs — formatting and markup is made pretty simple — so we’re led — quite
intuitively to think the web should be the same. And in someways, it is.

A lot of my friends for example know some basic HTML and some even with a bit of
hacking around, or google searching have even put together a basic Wordpress
site, or coded a cool addition to their mySpace way back when.

```html
<p>Making websites is so easy!</p>
<!-- Simple, right? -->
```

Only, as with about a billion other things in the world, the more you know, the
less you know, you know.

---

I coded my first basic website in high school with some simple HTML that was
available on the school intranet. That in itself felt like a triumph, but a lot
had been done for me. I didn’t have to worry about things like servers, or
routes, it was just a simple page. It had no Javascript, (Javascript was very
nascent) and used no CSS. Style was inline in each element, where needed. It was
fun, but it wasn’t extensible, and it was ultimately pretty limited. When I’d
completed it, it was nice, and flashy, but it didn’t look that different to a
well-formatted Word document and had been significantly more finicky to put
together.

I lost interest in looking into it further. It didn’t seem that hard, it just
felt tedious. Why bother?

It wouldn’t have been until the late noughties that I began to re-examine the
foundations of the web after working in online journalism. Here I was once
again, coding some basic HTML, but the web, and the possibilities it afforded
had grown immensely. Javascript had evolved and changed the game — websites
serving complex applications that looked slick were popping up all over the
place, and my appetite to dive in again was well and truly whet.

I dabbled around and made some progress in my spare time but progress was slow
and I was busy with work. I found the initial forays surprisingly challenging. I
say surprising, because it had never appeared that it would be so hard from the
outside, and the early strides had been smooth.. But then I kept getting stuck.

I got stuck in the mountains of documentation, in the dime a dozen tutorials
that promised results in weeks — in the forums, and discussion boards explaining
why one web development language was better than another, or about build
systems, compiling your code, minification and automation — the list went on —
and on — and on. After about 18 months of playing around on the side I gave up
again. I did have a fresh appreciation for what the web was, and some of its
tools, but I didn’t have the time to further pursue.

Until I did. I’ve often found that time apart from something allows you to
properly reflect and think about what you’ve learnt. For the knowledge to really
sink in. For me it was the kind of bug that pushed me into a decision to retrain
as Software Engineer — just shy of a decade into a prospering journalism career.
It’s a decision I don’t regret for an instant, it was purely a gut, intuition
type thing but it was 100 per cent the right thing to do.

Without the distraction of a full-time job I began studying in my daytime, and
programming in my evenings. What I quickly came to learn was that our instincts
of programming, and the web are mainly correct. It is simple, and need not be so
complicated but it’s a far deeper rabbit hole, in time, information and
expertise than is easy to do justice when you’re just getting your feet wet.
It’s undeniably a jungle out there, but it’s the kind of jungle that with a
little consideration and perseverance, can be navigated.

---

Some three years on and I now understand enough at least to make camp for the
night and survive. I know I don’t know a lot, but a know reams and reams more
than I could verbalise not so long ago. I’m still fascinated. If anything my
fascination has deepened and progressed, and taken me down pathways I didn’t
know existed.

I’ve just completed a website (my own in fact) with a framework called Vue.js
(will be writing about that more soon). It’s nothing special, but pulls together
a lot of web knowledge I’ve picked up over the past 18–24 months. It was a
massive learning experience. It’s taken me upwards of 80 hours to put together
from scratch. This is perhaps slightly exception given it’s my own website and
I’m liable to tinker unnecessarily, but it should put into perspective the grift
required.

_TL;DR — Becoming an web developer takes skill time, and dedication and it won’t
happen overnight..._

This article was originally published on
[medium](https://medium.com/@al-hinds/web-development-is-easy-right-6c27129d9764).
